feat(docs): add planned integrations for ENSDb snapshots, CLI, and webhooks (#2107)
namehash/ensnode: docs/ensnode.io/src/content/docs/docs/integrate/webhooks-and-events.mdx

---

> title: Webhooks & events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: ENSEngine
```

Please see related comment for this page's path to be updated to `/integrate/ensengine.mdx`

> description: Coming soon - ENS-native webhooks that fire when ENS state changes, so apps can stop polling and start reacting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Coming soon - ENS-native webhooks and push-based events that fire when ENS state changes, so apps can stop polling and start reacting.
```

---

import { LinkCard, Aside } from "@astrojs/starlight/components";

<Aside type="caution" title="Coming soon">

> ENS-native webhooks are a **planned** capability built on top of [ENSDb](/docs/services/ensdb). This page introduces the value proposition ahead of time - exact event names, subscription APIs, delivery guarantees, and release dates are still being worked out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ENS-native event-driven reactive development (such as webhooks) are coming soon with [ENSEngine](/docs/services/ensengine) that builds on top of [ENSDb](/docs/services/ensdb).
```

</Aside>

## The problem

Today, if you want your app to react to ENS state changes, you have two unappealing options:

> - **Poll constantly.** Hammer the GraphQL or RPC every few seconds and discard most responses. Wasteful, slow, and never quite fresh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Poll constantly.** Hammer API endpoints or RPCs every few seconds and discard most responses. Wasteful, inefficient, and scales poorly.
```

> - **Build your own indexer.** Stand up infrastructure to listen to chain events, decode them, and turn them into the ENS-level signals you actually care about. Way too much work for what should be a primitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Build your own complex indexer and data pipeline.** Stand up infrastructure to listen to chain events, decode them, and turn them into the ENS-level signals you actually care about. Way too much work for what should be a primitive.
```

> Neither is good. The first is lossy and expensive at scale; the second is a project on its own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## What we're building toward

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What we're building
```

> We're working on an **ENS-native webhooks service** so your app can subscribe to ENS state changes the same way you'd subscribe to a Stripe or GitHub webhook - except the events speak the language of ENS, not the language of raw chain logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ENSEngine will be an **ENS-native event-driven reactive development service** (for webhooks and more) so your app can subscribe to ENS state changes in ENSDb the same way you'd subscribe to a Stripe or GitHub webhook - except the events speak the language of discrete meaningful ENS actions, not the language of bare-metal raw onchain event transaction logs.
```

> Internally we refer to the planned service as **ENSEngine**: it watches your ENSDb for changes and turns them into ENS-aware webhook deliveries to any sink you configure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```http
POST https://your-app.example.com/webhooks/ens
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "type": "domain.transferred",
  "name": "vitalik.eth",

>   "chain": "mainnet",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  ...
}
```

> The shape above is illustrative only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The shape above is illustrative only. Full details coming soon.
```

> ## Example events (subject to change)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example events
```

> The early thinking covers the events most apps actually care about:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Events will represent meaningful ENS events, such as:
```

- `domain.registered`, `domain.renewed`, `domain.transferred`
- `resolver.address_changed`, `resolver.text_changed`, `resolver.contenthash_changed`
- `subname.created`

> This list is **not** a committed API surface - it's a sketch of what's in scope. Final event names, payloads, and filter options will land with the service itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ... and many more.
```

## What this unlocks

The headline use case - and the one we're prioritizing first - is **cache invalidation**.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Cache invalidation (priority focus)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Cache invalidation
```

> Build aggressive, edge-friendly caches for ENS data. The goal is to make it practical to cache profiles, avatars, text records, and resolver responses for much longer than polling-based integrations allow, then invalidate them when relevant onchain state changes. That's the foundation for web2-grade UX on a web3 protocol - fast page loads, low RPC fanout, globally distributed reads - without giving up freshness as the product matures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build aggressive, edge-friendly caches for ENS data. The goal is to make it practical to cache profiles, avatars, text records, and resolver responses for much longer than polling-based integrations allow, then invalidate them when relevant onchain state changes. That's the foundation for web2-grade UX on a web3 protocol - fast page loads, low RPC fanout, globally distributed reads - without giving up freshness.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Of course, ENSNode will also include metadata letting you know key attributes about ENS data you fetch so that you can wisely implement the best possible caching strategies. For example: If a particular data record is coming from purely onchain data (that will receive a guaranteed ENSEngine event notification as soon as it changes) or if a particular data record is coming from offchain data (such as a resolver record sourced through CCIP-read) and that therefore still requires polling to identify if it has changed.

```

Where this matters:

- Frontend apps caching ENS profiles
- CDNs serving ENS-driven content
- API gateways with ENS lookups

> - Any service that caches resolver records

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Any service that caches resolver records or other ENS data.
```

> ### Adjacent value props (enabled by the same primitive)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Additional key use cases
```

> Once a reliable change feed exists, a lot of follow-on patterns get dramatically easier to build *on top of it*. We're not promising these as separate features - they're examples of what the cache-invalidation foundation makes practical:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a reliable change feed exists, a lot of follow-on use cases get dramatically easier to build:
```

> - **Notification services** - expiry reminders, watchlists, security alerts on unexpected transfers, registration bots in Discord/Telegram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Notification services** - expiry reminders, watchlists, security alerts on unexpected transfers, activity bots in Discord/Telegram/Twitter.
```

> - **Database sync** - keep your own app database in step with ENS state, so marketplaces, portfolio trackers, analytics dashboards, and search indices don't drift.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Sync to alternative databases** - want to store alternative representations of ENSDb in databases that provide specialized benefits that Postgres doesn't offer, such as Elasticsearch, Typesense, Meliasearch, Redis, Kafka, Google BigQuery, and more? ENSEngine will ensure 100% delivery of database changes to sinks with strict ordering and exactly-once processing.
```

> - **Realtime dashboards** - surface registration / renewal / transfer activity as it happens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Realtime dashboards** - surface ENS analytics and activity data as it happens.
```

## How it works (high level)

> Reactive webhooks build on the same foundation as the rest of ENSNode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ENSEngine builds on solid foundations:
```

> 1. **[ENSIndexer](/docs/services/ensindexer)** keeps **[ENSDb](/docs/services/ensdb)** up to date with the live, multichain onchain state of ENS - including automatic chain reorg healing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **[ENSIndexer](/docs/services/ensindexer)** keeps **[ENSDb](/docs/services/ensdb)** up to date with the live, onchain state of ENS - including automatic chain reorg healing.
```

2. The planned **[ENSEngine](/docs/services/ensengine)** service watches that database for changes and turns them into enriched, filtered, ENS-aware events.
3. Those events get delivered to **your sinks** - webhooks, cache invalidation hooks, database sync targets, notification systems, and more.

For the architecture overview and code-name notes, see [ENSEngine - How it works](/docs/services/ensengine).

## What this page is not

This page is a teaser, not a spec. There's no subscription endpoint to call yet, no signature verification documented, no SDK to integrate against. Those will arrive in dedicated reference docs once the service ships.

If your app would benefit from any of the use cases above, it's a great time to share what you'd need from this service - we're still shaping it.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Related

<LinkCard

>   title="ENSEngine - How it works"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  title="ENSEngine Overview"
```

>   description="The planned service behind ENS-native webhooks. Code name is temporary."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description="Learn more about ENSEngine."
```

  href="/docs/services/ensengine"
/>

<LinkCard
  title="ENSDb (PostgreSQL)"
  description="The live ENS state webhooks are built on. Available today via SQL or the ENSDb SDK."
  href="/docs/integrate/integration-options/ensdb"
/>

<LinkCard
  title="ENSDb snapshots & CLI (planned)"
  description="The other coming-soon capability built on ENSDb: bootstrap a fresh ENSDb in minutes."
  href="/docs/integrate/ensdb-snapshots-and-cli"

> />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
